The essence of Dharma is compassion and wisdom, completely in union, and so just like every
time we begin any study, any contemplation, any practice, we're really starting right
on the ground, right from the beginning, the Buddha is pointing out the nature, and so therefore
that's why in our practice we're always beginning, in one voice, all our great kind teachers are
reminding us, just start where we are, right from the beginning, so we're always creating
these three frames. We're all, in our essence, good from the beginning, and so then, kind
of setting up the frame of our time to touch home base with our practice, we'll start good
from the beginning. So that means we're connecting with our good motivation, or really connecting
with our heart-of-heart intention, reminding of ourselves of how things are. That's really
the essence of the Buddhist teachings. And so we'll just begin, just everyone reflecting
a little bit, because it's so profound, on kind of our joy and our appreciation, just
how precious and special our opportunity is within the vast endless realm of possibilities.
Here we are, and we go on to the four thoughts, but just, you know, so just really connecting
with how precious the opportunity is to have a moment to reflect, and the interest to reflect
on our true nature, and with very reliable teachings and living guides to help us realize
our own nature and explore that, and find our own certainty, wisdom with that. And then
of course expanding our bodhicitta, our thought of just expanding our minds and hearts, that
all of our actions can be of great benefit, especially this moment, and the next moment,
and the moment after that, can just ever expand in our realization of the true nature, which
is nothing but wisdom, love, compassion. The mind of enlightenment is literally what bodhicitta
means. It's the heart essence of all the Buddhist teachings. It is what's called our inherent
nature itself, limitless wisdom, love, compassion. And so then, on the relative level, just
expanding
our minds and hearts, really setting that intention that this time we have to reflect a little
bit on the profound ocean of Dharma, and begin to practice. It can truly be a benefit for
ourselves and others. Like the beautiful prayer in our, even in this book goes, you know,
bless my mind to turn toward the Dharma, bless my Dharma practice to follow the path, bless
my path to be free of delusion. Bless me that all delusions be transformed into wisdom,
and then even more so, by realizing true nature. May we mature our own minds, and then through
compassion and love, may we help mature the minds of others and support each other. And
then through the blessings of the three jewels, you know, may all of our contacts and relations
be meaningful and beneficial, and come to be through the great truth and genuine nature
of the great support we have in the Buddha, the Dharma, the Sangha, and the inherent purity,
which is this third motivation of just really connecting with our devotion, with our awe
and our reverence, our closeness feeling to the true nature of things, to the beautiful
minds and hearts of our teachers, and friends, and masters, the ultimate nature of everything.
So these are the three motivations, you know, joy, devotion, contentment, less grasping,
a mind and heart full of love and compassion that's impartial for every single living being
without exception. And just joy and closeness feeling, irreverence and trust and the deep
essential goodness of things is called devotion or pure vision. That's where we always begin
our practice, our study, our contemplation with, and that's the essence of what we're
practicing. That's the essence of the three vehicles, of the foundational vehicle of the
Buddha's teachings and practice, of the Mahayana, of this bodhicitta, of the Vajrayana, the purity
vision and devotion, all inseparably joined, working together. And that's the whole of
the path, that's the whole of the Buddha's teachings and practices. So we're starting
right from the heart, right from the start with these things and trying to maintain that
atmosphere as we go and everything lands with that. And we have these beautiful practices,
the nundro practices, which again, we all know, but reflecting nundro means going before,
which means the foundations, the essence. And so these nundro practices are just such
a beautiful place for this whole vast ocean of the Buddhist teachings to kind of land
in our limited time, within our limited awareness at the moment, to begin to explore the teachings.
And we'll just take a couple moments to just kind of reflect in our own ways and hearts
that's why we're here, to do this together. And we've all heard and read many different
teachings to some degree. And now there's some people who are maybe newer, but it doesn't
matter if we're all just do our best. So we'll just take a moment to reflect on those things.
And so we've been doing this for a little while. And I thought maybe today, just to
begin to look a little bit towards one of the essential practices in nundro, which is called
taking refuge. And so, again and again, we can reflect on our situation. And I find it
just really helpful, just like the nundro practices are embodying all of the Buddhist
teachings and practices based on these motivations, you know, renunciation, joy, appreciation,
bodhicitta, love, compassion, devotion, coming all together as one practice. Those who've
realized that, that's the great perfection is the whole of all the Buddhist teachings.
And we're so fortunate that in our practice lineage, this stainless chain of practitioners
has come to us in our lives and brought us this whole thing, Buddhahood, like they say,
in the palm of our hand, in the heart of our hearts. And then we're not ignoring anything
in our practice. We're using relative truth and to explore absolute truth, just like wisdom,
compassion, purify our vision, see things more and more clearly. And that's why we have
these practices. So within the nundro, we have the outer nundro, or more common, which
is, again, everything comes down to the Buddha with our nundro practices, who's always there
is a Guru Padma Sambhava, embodiment of all the Buddhists of the three times is the Buddha
is the Dharma is the Sangha, all embodied in Guru Padma Sambhava, all of them.
And just like we say in our lineage prayers, you know, the one who shows clearly the Dharma
makaya of my own mind, the true nature of my own mind, let's say like Rinpoche say, is
our true nature is one who's realized that the word Buddha itself means fully awakened,
fully developed, what is fully developed, the mind of enlightenment, limitless wisdom, limitless
love, limitless compassion. And that shines forth as the Dharma, the teachings and realizations
that occur through that compassion. And then everything in our experience, those who follow
those teachings on the outer level, as well as our whole experience is the Sangha, those
who are on the path of realizing our true nature, of becoming more aware, purifying.
So in the Buddhist teachings, we all have Buddha nature, we all have inherently natural
qualities of wisdom, love, compassion. It's just to what degree we actually really recognize
that. Like they say in this very famous Tantra of Samantabhadra Buddha, the primordial Buddha,
the source is always there, the nature of mind is always there. But there's two ways
we can go. There's recognizing nature exactly as it is without any obscurations. That's
called Buddhahood. And not recognizing that, which is called ignorance in different degrees.
It's called ordinary sentient being like myself. It's called samsara, not knowing, the miracle
of not knowing, samsara, the miracle of knowing the true nature, nirvana. Their essence is
the same, is the teaching. And it's up to us to explore what that truly means.
Every single Buddha that exists in Bodhisattva had a teacher, had that expressive quality
of the true nature appearing and meeting their own mind and heart to awaken and remove our
obscurations to how things are. With our basic ignorance or not knowing how things are, we
tend to think, of course, that we are permanent, that we don't really see or ignore how things
are connected. By simply not knowing how things are, we just create this great experience,
and we are the fortunate ones. But like the Buddha taught from the very beginning, in
the Four Noble Truths, which relates to these things, again, the miracle of not knowing,
samsara is also called suffering, it's challenge, it's kind of discontent, we're discontent,
we're uncomfortable in different degrees. But I think that's because we have a sense
of our true, of what's really underneath there somewhere, because that's our own nature.
So there's the truth of suffering, the first noble truth of the Buddha. But again, suffering
isn't just itself, samsara is a state of mind. There's causes for samsara, the cause is ignorance
and grasping, and then because everything is connected, the wish-fulfilling jewel of mind
presents itself. So by misunderstanding how things are and acting out of hope and fear,
we create samsara. And samsara, like the Buddha's always saying, happens within our own mind.
It's not so much an outer circumstance, it's a state of mind, it's the deep down teaching.
But then the Buddha taught more than that, that deeper, there's freedom from suffering,
and that freedom is not something outside either. That freedom is our very nature, again,
free of obscurations. So there's freedom from suffering, and there's causes for that. There's
ways in which we can liberate ourselves from our misunderstanding through study, through
contemplation, through practice of these beautiful teachings that the great kind ones have given
us. [pause]
And then we really just explore that, and we realize how things are connected, that our
actions do have results, even the little bits we can see, even just our attitude and how
it affects others in just one day, not to mention to whatever degree we can see within
this life, the effects of our outlook and actions done on our outlook. Like, you know,
great Shanti Deva said, all the suffering existing in our lives and others is based
on selfishness. All the happiness of ourselves and others comes from thinking of others.
[pause]
And when we begin to look at how things are connected, to some degree, look at the teachings
on interdependence, how everything is magically this net of connections. And when we are looking
at our frame of mind, we can look at just the inevitability of our actions. That's called
karma. The karma of not knowing and actions done in different degrees of ignorance is
samsara and eventually less and less and less obscurations and more and more and more just
seeing things clearly as they are, free of kind of the limits of our conception but in
our direct perception, that's ascending on the path. So seeing how things are connected,
how our karma, how our actions inevitably have their results and how things are always changing
in permanence, reflecting on that and how precious within all of the possibilities,
like we said in the beginning, that we have this life, that we have these teachings, that
we have the ability to explore them and not only read them, hear them, but begin to see
if they are helpful for us in our own minds and hearts. These are called the four thoughts
that turn the mind, the preciousness of our existence, how fleeting, everything is always
moving, everything is always changing in permanence, everything is connected and moving and not
understanding how things are is samsara and our samsara is our samsara. It all comes from
our own mind and we are purifying. Those who have purified their minds are well on the
way, are the noble sangha, are the buddhas, are the great bodhisattvas, are our great
kind teachers appearing to us in our lives. So kind of reflecting on these four thoughts
is so vital and important, said, when every session begins and we say again and again
and again, but really contemplating them in our days, really taking them to heart because
those are really essential, like Rinpoche said, it kind of helps reflecting on them, means
we're really reflecting on how things are, we're not so disappointed in things because
we're actually recognizing how things are. This is precious, we have our challenges but
we have precious life, precious opportunity and it won't be with us forever, like they
say make hay while the sun shines. This is a beautiful moment, a beautiful life, really
make meaning of it and all of our actions do have results. So really checking our mind
and our motivation, really keeping our mindfulness and our alertness and seeing how much our
state of mind and our actions are really connected to what we truly value and love and embrace
and support. So vital, beautiful, and really just remembering samsara. Samsara is not it,
there's deeper, it gets better, is what the Buddhas and bodhisattvas are showing us. And
so that is turning our mind toward the Dharma, turning our mind towards the Buddha, turning
our minds toward the Dharma, turning our minds towards the Sangha and seeing their value,
letting them inspire us to explore our reality. Again to refrain, become more and more aware
of what's causing ourselves and others trouble and refraining as we need to and can and more
important seeing what really brings our benefit and balance and strength and brings out our
just natural goodness qualities and lightness of heart and mind and kindness and good habits
that help support things, engaging in beneficial activities, meaningful activities in line
with our true intentions and always remembering the really important thing. It's all happening
in our mind, taming our mind, becoming more and more familiar with the nature of our mind.
That's the path of meditation and that's what we're doing with these practices. Turning our
mind towards the Three Jewels who are embodied as the Lama, the mind of realization in our
precious teachers in this life and like his whole and his dudrim and bhishay, Guru Padma
Sambhava, Buddha Shakyamuni, Tara, Yeshay Sojal, their realization. That's what we're really
having a draw to. So we don't have a whole lot more time to go but the essence of taking
refuge is like the reason I went over all the four thoughts is because they're so vital
but also the essence of taking refuge right is we're moving towards something that's reliable.
We're taking refuge and we're embracing and embodying and exploring what's reliable. We're
moving away from what's unreliable. Our unreliable, unrealistic, impractical assumptions about
who we are and what's happening. We're moving away from that towards what's more reliable,
what's more tried by time as truth. So there's basic ways we can do that and maybe it's getting
towards time to just start our practice. So I'm hoping and then we have all these times
so I hope this is helpful. But refuge, moving towards what's reliable. As much as we can
explore just how things are deep, deep on the outer level and kind of reverse our assumptions,
the things are great. Refrain from harm, engage in good, tame our own mind, work with our own
mind and look towards these great role models we have as the Buddha and the teachings and
expressions of compassion that they give us and support each other as a sangha. That's
it until we ourselves can become an object of refuge. So maybe next week we can go a little
bit more into just reflecting on what is the Buddha? What is a Buddha? What are the qualities
of a Buddha? What is the Dharma? What are different ways of framing? What is the Dharma, the
teachings
of the Buddha? And what is the sangha? There's so many levels and layers and we don't have
to wait till next week to do it. Hopefully to whatever degree we've heard these teachings
and contemplated that as we go through the practice. We're giving a place for that atmosphere
to land and settle and for our mind to be with that and just create those beautiful ripples
of accumulating our merit and our wisdom, our positive karma towards realization, ushering
our minds through conception, ushering our minds beyond conception to the true nature,
uniting skillful means and wisdom, love and compassion. It's a lot of words but we've
all heard some degree of the teachings and it's nice if we can practice them together.
So we'll begin I think little by little just reflecting more on the different phases of
the nundra practice and can reflect on that according to our time and our capacities.
But we really have about an hour now to move through the practices so we'll do that and
again as we're chanting just reflect on the meaning. Whatever the meaning is for us at
this moment and relax our mind and we'll always come back to just letting go. Again that's
the essence of becoming familiar, the path of meditation. Buddha gave us two main frames
for that called shamatha and vipassana, calm, abiding, developing our concentration and
then with that as a good base what's truly liberative is seeing things as they are or
supreme seeing, insight, direct perception into the nature of things and how they appear.
So that's what we're doing with our practice. That's the path of meditation. So we're always
going to the essence of shamatha is holding a focus of being within the container. The
essence of vipassana is opening, releasing, letting go. And so we'll just be with that
breath as we're practicing.